#Getting and Cleaning Data - Course Project

The repository contains the work I did for the course project of the Coursera course "Getting and Cleaning data".

#The UCI HAR Dataset (raw data)

The UCI HAR Dataset represent data collected from the accelerometers from the Samsung Galaxy S smartphone. A full description is available in the "README.txt"" file availlable in "UCI HAR Dataset" folder in the current repo, as much as at this website: 

http://archive.ics.uci.edu/ml/datasets/Human+Activity+Recognition+Using+Smartphones 

#The script to generate the tidy data set

The script 'run_analysis.R' does the following:

1. Merges the training and the test sets to create one data set.
2. Extracts only the measurements on the mean and standard deviation for each measurement. 
3. Uses descriptive activity names to name the activities in the data set
4. Appropriately labels the data set with descriptive activity names. 
5. Creates a second, independent tidy data set with the average of each variable for each activity and each subject. 

To run prorerly, the script requires that the UCI HAR Dataset must be availble (uncompressed) in a directory called "UCI HAR Dataset", as in the current repo. Furthermore, it requires the "dplyr" package to be installed (availlable at "http://cran.rstudio.com/bin/macosx/mavericks/contrib/3.1/dplyr_0.4.1.tgz"). 

The tidy data set generated by the script will be saved as "Tidy data set.txt" in the main folder.

# the Code Book

The CodeBook.md file describes the variables, the data, and the transformations performed to clean up the data.

